<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These ten orders are (1) the orthoptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> grasshoppers and crickets; (2) the neuroptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> dragonflies; (3) the hymenoptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> bees, wasps, and ants; (4) the lepidoptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> butterflies and moths; (5) the hemiptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> cicadas and fleas; (6) the coleoptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> cockchafers and glowworms; (7) the diptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> gnats and flies; (8) the rhipiptera, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the stylops; (9) the parasites, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the acarus; and (10) the thysanura, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the lepisma and podura. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This and several of the other rules are concisely concentrated in the couplet⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Long foretold, long last;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Short notice, soon past. </span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><a href="chapter-1-11.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This bark was formerly, reduced to powder, known as “Pulvis Jesuiticus,” because in the year 1649 the Jesuits in Rome imported a large quantity of it from their missionaries in South America. <a href="chapter-1-17.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Subordinate Portuguese governors at secondary stations. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cameron says, “In order to obtain the fifty women of whom Alvez is the owner, ten villages, containing altogether a population of not less than 1,500, were totally destroyed. A few of the inhabitants contrived to escape, but the majority either perished in the flames, were slain in defending their families, or were killed by hunger or wild beasts in the jungle.⁠ ⁠… The crimes which are perpetuated in Africa, by men who call themselves Christians, seem incredible to the inhabitants of civilized countries. It is impossible that the government at Lisbon can be aware of the atrocities committed by those who boast of being subject to her flag.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Tour du Monde</i>.</p>
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr>-Against these assertions of Cameron, loud protestations have been made in Portugal. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koodoo, a ruminant common in Africa. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The horrible hecatombs that commemorate the death of any powerful chief in Central Africa defy all description. Cameron relates that more than a hundred victims were sacrificed at the obsequies of the father of the King of Kassongo. <a href="chapter-2-12.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This extraordinary feat was, it is universally known, subsequently accomplished by Cameron. <a href="chapter-2-14.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
